FOCUS #152: Commitment Utilization (#180)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/dimensions/commitmentutilization.md

> # Commitment Utilization

Reviewer: I am personally not in favor of the use of the term "Utilization" in this fashion.  To my mind, the term "Utilization" implies a crucial FinOps KPI that, as we all know, is a percentage measure that returns the result of Used / (Used + Not Used).  However, here, it is being used to describe a attribute that one could use in order to derive that calculation.  This introduces a semantic conflict later, if and when the FOCUS spec add "Utilization" to the list of Metrics (which I hope it does!).

I feel that the term "Utilized" or "Utilized Flag" would not only help delineate from that, but it would also be more self-documenting and imply that this is an attribute with two (and only two) possible values.

I also prefer the members of a flag attribute to follow the same pattern as the name of the attribute.  To that end, I propose the use of "Utilized" and "Not Utilized" instead of "Used" and "Not Used".

Reviewer 2: This is the primary thing I was expecting to hear from people on this column 🙂 I love that "Utilization" binds it to the KPI, but it is a good point that there could possibly be confusion around the column vs. KPI.

A few other thoughts on names:
1. `CommitmentStatus` was our original name. We thought about "Status" for coverage calculation, but that would require separate columns per commitment type, so we scoped it out.
2. `CommitmentUtilized` sounds like a boolean (true/false). I'm personally not a huge fan of that word given it's not something we use often in English, but it is at least aligned to the KPI.
3. `CommitmentUsage` is another option I suppose. "Usage" is a more common term than "Utilization".

"UtilizationType" feels unnecessarily long.

I'll keep this open to get more feedback.

Reviewer 3: I agree CommitmentUtilization refers more to a Commitment KPI, and my preference goes to 3. CommitmentUsage.

Another possibility may be "UnusedCommitment" with values "Yes" and "No".

Reviewer 2: Added your suggestion above so they're all together. 
Tracking 2 votes against CommitmentUtilization, so that sounds good.
What do others think? Should we do a poll or can we get consensus here?

Reviewer 4: Maybe `CommittmentUsed` or `CommitmentUtilized`?

Reviewer 2: Vote here: https://finopsfoundation.slack.com/archives/C053CNCRVCL/p1698191641650719

> Commitment Utilization indicates whether a charge utilized a commitment during the charge period. Commitment Utilization applies to all commitments and commitment types applied to the current charge. This includes but is not limited to capacity commitments and commitment-based discounts represented by the Commitment Discount ID. Commitment Utilization is commonly used to identify wastage when a commitment has not been used and to calculate commitment utilization.

Reviewer 5: Do we have definition of charge period? Maybe we should say billing period instead?

Reviewer 2: See the ChargePeriodStart/End columns. The Charge Period is the granularity of the data, so a day or hour of usage in this case. Whatever the row is covering.

Reviewer 5: Clear now, thanks

> Commitment Utilization indicates whether a charge utilized a commitment during the charge period. Commitment Utilization applies to all commitments and commitment types applied to the current charge. This includes but is not limited to capacity commitments and commitment-based discounts represented by the Commitment Discount ID. Commitment Utilization is commonly used to identify wastage when a commitment has not been used and to calculate commitment utilization.

Reviewer 4: **Commitment Utilization** is commonly used to identify wastage when a commitment has not been used and to calculate commitment utilization.
Commitment Utilization is used twice referring to different meaning

Reviewer 2: Great catch! We're going to change the column name, so it's probably fine... Let's see how it looks when we update the column name.

> Commitment Utilization indicates whether a charge utilized a commitment during the charge period. Commitment Utilization applies to all commitments and commitment types applied to the current charge. This includes, but is not limited to capacity commitments and commitment-based disocunts represented by the Commitment Disocunt ID. Commitment Utilization is commonly used to identify wastage when a commitment has not been used and to calculate commitment utilization.

Reviewer: small typo: disocunts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Commitment Utilization indicates whether a charge utilized a commitment during the charge period. Commitment Utilization applies to all commitments and commitment types applied to the current charge. This includes, but is not limited to capacity commitments and commitment-based discounts represented by the Commitment Discount ID. Commitment Utilization is commonly used to identify wastage when a commitment has not been used and to calculate commitment utilization.
```

The CommitmentUtilization column MUST be present and MUST NOT be null when a commitment is applied or CommitmentDiscountId is set. This column is of type String and MUST be one of the allowed values.

## Column ID

CommitmentUtilization

## Display Name

Commitment Utilization

## Description

Indicates whether a charge utilized a commitment during the charge period.

## Content Constraints

| Constraint      | Value          |
| :-------------- | :------------- |

> | Column required | True           |

Reviewer 6: @BenShy @flanakin Regarding Line 23

When an unused value is rolled over from one contract to a subsequent contract - is that an exception to the "MUST" criteria? I'm familiar with a pre-paid commitment with a 10% rollover clause; in practice - if the customer uses 92% of what they prepaid - the remaining 8% is added to the subsequent contract - but does NOT have to be purchased again.

This would get complicated in the scenario where a customer consumes 85% of what they pre-paid, rolls over 10% to a subsequent contract and has 5% that they have to add into their cost data.

Happy to work through scenarios if you believe it needs to be part of V1.0
```suggestion
| Column required | False |

| Data type       | String         |
| Allows nulls    | True           |
| Value format    | list-of-values |

> Allowed values:

Reviewer 5: What is the real value of this column for practitioners especially when it's partially used? Wouldn't be more helpful to display in this column the unused portion of commitment so practitioners could easily calculate the 'waste' across all the commitments. And to display 0 if it's fully used/utilized.
What is suggested value in case of commitment is partially used?

Reviewer 2: The intent isn't to put a number here. It's to identify whether this row was for `Used` commitment or `Not Used` commitment. So if you want to calculate utilization, you can group by this column to get what was used vs. not used. You can also quantify waste by filtering on `Not Used`.

If that's not clear, we should tweak the text to make it clearer. We'll also cover it in the Discount Handling spec, but let's make sure it's clear here first. Any thoughts on how we could make it more obvious?

Reviewer 5: After getting into more details it's clear. Probably the name is a bit misleading which I believe is a subject for discussion anyway.
